(upbeat music)
All right, before we get into promises,
we need to talk about how JavaScript is asynchronous
and how the event loop works.
So, you'll often hear that almost everything in JavaScript
is asynchronous or non blocking.
What does that even mean?
Well in order to understand what that means
we need to talk about how JavaScript events work.
JavaScript is a single threaded language,
which means that only one thing can only be run
at a time.
Some other languages are multithreaded,
meaning they can run multiple processes at once,
but JavaScript is single threaded,
meaning we can only ever run one thing at once.
So let's visualize that.
I've got eventdashloop.
It's in our playground folder,
open that up and let's write some code here.
Let's just console.log starting
and we'll console.log ending and we refresh.
Nobody's surprised by that.
Now if I go into the middle here
and I wanna wait for two seconds.
Maybe we could do a timeout,
so do a setTimeout.
And that will take a function that will console.log running
and then we'll run that after two seconds.
So, if I refresh this, what are we gonna see?
Are we gonna see starting, running, ending?
Starting ending and then two seconds later, we got running.
Okay well, that's not the order that I coded this in.
Shouldn't it do starting, wait two seconds,
running and then ending and unfortunately,
it doesn't work that way because the way that JavaScript
works is that it will parse the first line.
And say okay, well, let's console.log starting.
Then it will parse the next couple lines
'cos this is a function called SetTimeout.
And it will say okay, there's this thing called
a callback here.
Let me put that sort of,
let me put a pin in that for a second,
and I'll come back to that in two seconds.
And then it goes ahead and runs the next line,
which is ending and then what happens is two seconds later,
what comes back is this callback that's been queued up,
and it will run it for us.
And that is what was referred to as the call stack.
Now there the whole call stack in the event loop is
it's a pretty complicated thing to understand.
And instead of me just sitting here,
I'm gonna give you some homework that is someone else
and Philip Roberts has this amazing talk.
Look at this over a million views.
It's probably seven years eight years old
by the time you're watching this,
but it doesn't matter because that stuff doesn't change.
It doesn't change how we understand.
So I would highly recommend that you go through
and watch this talk.
You don't necessarily have to do it before you move on
with this course, because I think we'll get to know
we'll know enough to get forward
but if you really want to understand the nitty gritty
into how this works, definitely take a look at this talk.
It's just a masterpiece.
Probably the most popular JavaScript talk
that has ever been given.
And what's cool about that is he has built this little tool
called loop, which will sort of help us visualize
the call stack and the call stack in JavaScript
we've looked at it before.
When you click something it will sure to give you a treasure
trail of what functions were called up until that,
but we know that the call stack can only ever run
one function at a time.
So what happens when you have to run this function?
Then you run this function you got to wait for two seconds.
JavaScript is asynchronous, meaning it's not going
to stop running this.
It's going to put this off in what we call
the web API, and when that has come back after two seconds,
it's going to stick it in the callback queue,
and when the call stack has a free second,
when it's not currently running anything
it's gonna reach into the callback queue,
grab that callback and run it for us.
So let's go ahead and take this code
and paste it in here and I'm just gonna bring this down here
so we got a console.log starting,
we got our setTimeout that has our console.log.
By the way this tool at least when I'm recording this
is a bit outdated.
So, it does not handle arrow functions
or any of the backticks or anything that we've done there.
So just use regular function declarations
when you're doing that.
Now when I go ahead and save and run this thing
we're gonna visualize what's happening here.
So it goes through, it runs console.log.
It runs our timeout and then it runs our console.log
and then it ships off.
Let me make this a little bit longer
so I can sort of talk to you while it's happening.
Let's make that seven seconds.
Runs our log, runs our timeout.
Oh there's a callback so let's put that into our Web API
and when that's done, it's going to stick it in the queue
and then the call stack, if it has nothing else to do,
at the time, it will then reach into the queue
and grab the next thing.
So the call stack is what JavaScript itself is doing.
The web API's are things that are waiting
or things that we are listening for like event handlers.
If I was listening for a click on a button,
something like that that, would go in our Web APIs
and then when something happens in the web API
like a click of a button or a timer that has finished,
it will stick it into the callback,
into the callback queue and then the call stack
will reach into the callback queue
when it has nothing left to do
and pull the next one on that.
So similarly if I were to set an interval like this,
and every 100 milliseconds let's just console.log,
boop, and let's name this function just so we can
visualize what it is, let's call it boop.
And when we run this now so your console.log,
or timeout it goes back to our anonymous function here.
Then the setinterval runs and then the console.log,
and you see every second it's going back
into our boop-boop-boop.
Last thing I want to show you here is that even
if this is zero seconds, and you might see this
every now and then.
So we log starting after zero seconds
we console.log running and then we run ending.
What are we gonna get there?
Ready? Starting, ending, running.
Starting, ending, running.
Even after zero seconds, well why is that?
Well even though it's after zero seconds
what happens is that JavaScript runs a first line.
Then it runs this set timeout
and queues up the callback to happen after zero seconds
and then runs the neckline,
and even though this is zero seconds
it still adds it to the Web API
and then that immediately adds it to the callback queue
but because the browser is already busy
running the console.log,
then this callback gets run after it.
So let me show you this.
It changes to zero seconds right here and run it.
Starting, running the timeout,
the anonymous functions in the callback queue.
Now here's nothing in the callback queue
and we go ahead and run it.
So let me call that running so we can visualize it again.
So run it, console.log, put some running
in the callback queue and then when there's nothing left
on the callback queue for it has a second.
It says okay uh I got a second to catch my breath.
Let me look in the callback here.
Oh there's something to do.
Let me grab that from the callback queue,
bring it up to the call stack and go ahead and run it.
So, that's a nice little visualization
of how the call stack works.
And again I encourage you to check out this talk
for a much more in-depth look at how it works.
It's a little bit complex and I don't think that you
as a beginner web developer or as an intermediate
JavaScript developer need to understand
the nitty-gritty of that.
I think what you need to really understand here is that
JavaScript is single threaded,
meaning that the call stack can only ever run one thing at
a time and if there are multiple things queued up,
this is obviously slowed down significantly,
but if there are multiple things queued up,
like if I were to delete this
and just go to his example that he has here
and run the example that we have here.
So this is a click handler.
This is jQuery but it's the same idea
when you click a button, set a timer for two seconds,
and say you clicked me, then console.log high,
then set another timer for five seconds
and then console.log.
So how does that work?
Well run it, it sticks to listener in here.
We console.log.
We set another timer.
See these things that are now queued up
and when they are finished, like the timer is done,
it sticks it into the callback queue
and the call stack picks it up.
Now if I were to click on it,
every single time I add a click handler in here it sticks
it into the callback queue and you see the call stack
is reaching in and grabbing the next callback
to handle itself.
This is significantly slowed down.
Obviously things are much faster than this
but that gives you an idea as to how this
is actually working.
You see these timers.
Whenever the timer runs out it sticks
it back in the call stack as well.
So all of that to say how do we deal with stuff
in JavaScript that does take time,
that does need to wait for two seconds,
that does need to wait for a network request
to come back?
Like the classic example in JavaScript
is if I want to go off to an API
and grab some data and then come back to it,
we shouldn't have to freeze up the entire browser
or we shouldn't have to stop everything else
in the browser, well that goes and fetches it.
What we want to do is we want to send off
the fetch request and to go get that data
and then carry on with the rest of our life,
and then when the data does come back to us,
we can deal with it.
Much like the set timeout when the timer is done,
then we can come back to that and deal with it.
So callbacks are great but it's very difficult
to orchestrate multiple things at once.
So let's try and do this example right here.
I'm just gonna copy paste my instructions in here.
What we want to do here is make a div
and change the text to go when it's clicked.
Then make up a circle after two seconds
and make it red after half a second
and make it square after 0.25 seconds,
make it purple, fade it out and then finish.
Okay like this is not an uncommon thing to do in JavaScript
where you have to do things in series one after another.
So what we'll do here is we'll make a div,
and we'll give it a class of go.
And we'll just say click me.
Now I'm just gonna console.log.
I'm gonna comment that out
and we'll go ahead and select that div
so, const go is equal to document.querySelector go.
And the first one is change the text to go when clicked.
Okay so we'll say go.addEventlistener.
We're gonna listen for a click
and when that happens, we'll run a function
and that will say we'll grab the event,
will say const the l is equal to
l e.currenttarget.
Lets console.log the l.
The reason why I'm sticking this in a variable
will make sense in just a second.
Open that up, I'll click it
and we get the div, okay cool.
Now let's put some default styling on that,
so just give yourself a style tag somewhere on the page,
and we'll grab the go and say margin five rem,
and background white, padding five rem as well.
Okay, cool, let's also give it a width of five rem.
No 15, no 25 okay cool.
So next thing make it a circle after two seconds.
Okay so, I have to start a time,
after they click it start a timer for two seconds.
Okay well we can put some in here.
So say set timeout and then we'll have a function
that runs in here after two seconds.
And we'll say l.classlists.add circle,
okay and then we'll go up to here,
say .go.circle, border radius 50%.
Click me, then it makes itself into a circle.
Oh we forgot to change the text to go when clicked.
So let's say l.textcontent is equal to go.
Let's put a height on this as well, so it's square.
Okay here we go.
Go that goes to circle.
If we put a transition on there, transition all 0.2 seconds.
Okay good.
Now next one, make it circle after two seconds.
We did that.
Let's put that here.
Make it red after 0.5 seconds.
Okay so now we have to put another setTimeout in here,
function and that is 500 milliseconds,
and we will l.classlist.add red.
Go up here say .go.red background red.
Good okay next one, make a square after 0.25 seconds.
Okay setTimeout function 250 milliseconds.
Then we'll say l.classlist.remove circle.
Make it purple after 0.4 seconds, oh boy,
function so setTimeout function 300 milliseconds
and we will l.classlist.remove red and add purple.
I'll go up here.
Okay maybe when it's purple, we'll change
the color to be white.
Beautiful.
Fade out after 0.5 seconds okay, we could do that.
setTimeout function 500 milliseconds,
and we'll say l.classlist.fadeout.
Nope .add fadeout.
Okay, I'll go here to .go.fadeout opacity zero.
All right whew.
So that was probably the simplest like little animation
that we did there, and like look at this.
Awful.
This is what is referred to as callback hell,
and callback hell is if you need to do one thing
after another, you must nest the callbacks
inside of each other because they all depend
on the previous callback to being called before
it can then go ahead and run.
And this is a relatively simple thing to do
and you end up getting,
this is also called Christmas tree code if you look
at it sideways here.
Look at how indented we are with this type of thing right?
Not really all that great to go ahead.
So, the solution to callback hell
is the promised land,
and promises are sort of an IOU for something
that will happen in the future,
and promises allow us to write code
that is much easier to look at.
It's much flatter and that's what we're gonna look at
in the next video as to how do we get out of callback hell
and into the promised land.